ComputeServerless computeServerless compute limitations
Last updated on Jun 18, 2026
Serverless compute limitations

This article explains the current limitations of serverless compute for notebooks and jobs. It starts with an overview of the most important considerations and then provides a comprehensive reference list of limitations.

Language and API support​
R is not supported.
Only Spark Connect APIs are supported. Spark RDD APIs are not supported.
Spark Connect, which is used by serverless compute, defers analysis and name resolution to execution time, which may change the behavior of your code. See Compare Spark Connect to Spark Classic.
ANSI SQL is the default when writing SQL. Opt-out of ANSI mode by setting spark.sql.ansi.enabled to false.
When creating a DataFrame from local data using spark.createDataFrame, row sizes cannot exceed 128MB.
Data access and storage​
You must use Unity Catalog to connect to external data sources. Use external locations to access cloud storage.
Access to DBFS is limited. Use Unity Catalog volumes or workspace files instead.
Maven coordinates are not supported.
Global temp views are not supported. When cross-session data passing is required, Databricks recommends using session temporary views or creating tables.
DBFS mounts with AWS instance profiles are not supported.
User-defined functions (UDFs)​
User-defined functions (UDFs) cannot access the internet. Because of this, the CREATE FUNCTION (External) command is not supported. Databricks recommends using CREATE FUNCTION (SQL and Python) to create UDFs.
User-defined custom code, such as UDFs, map, and mapPartitions, cannot exceed 1 GB in memory usage.
Scala UDFs cannot be used inside higher-order functions.
UI and logging​
The Spark UI is not available. Instead, use the query profile to view information about your Spark queries. See Query profile.
Spark logs are not available. Users only have access to client-side application logs.
Networking and workspace access​
Cross-workspace access is allowed only if the workspaces are in the same region and the destination workspace does not have an IP ACL or front-end PrivateLink configured.
Databricks Container Services is not supported.
Streaming limitations​

Serverless compute supports the following Structured Streaming triggers:

Trigger.AvailableNow(). Databricks recommends this trigger mode for serverless compute.
Trigger.Once(). This deprecated mode is supported but not recommended.

The following triggers are not supported on serverless compute:

Trigger.Continuous(interval).
Trigger.ProcessingTime(interval).
By default, if you don't specify a trigger mode, Apache Spark sets the trigger to Trigger.ProcessingTime("0 seconds"). You must set a supported trigger on serverless compute.

If you attempt to use an unsupported trigger, the query raises an error INFINITE_STREAMING_TRIGGER_NOT_SUPPORTED.

For continuous streaming workloads, use Triggered vs. continuous pipeline mode in continuous mode on serverless, or use Trigger.AvailableNow() in a Run jobs continuously.

For a decision guide that maps streaming use cases to the right serverless product, see Streaming on serverless compute.

All limitations for streaming on standard access mode also apply. See Streaming limitations.

Notebooks limitations​
Scala and R are not supported in notebooks.
JAR libraries are not supported in notebooks. For workarounds, see Best practices for serverless compute. JAR tasks in jobs are supported. See JAR task for jobs.
Notebook-scoped libraries are not cached across development sessions.
Sharing TEMP tables and views when sharing a notebook among users is not supported.
Autocomplete and Variable Explorer for dataframes in notebooks are not supported.
By default, new notebooks are saved in .ipynb format. If your notebook is saved in source format, serverless metadata might not be captured correctly, and some features might not function as expected.
Notebook tags are not supported. Use serverless usage policies to tag serverless usage.
Job limitations​
Task logs are not isolated per task run. Logs will contain the output from multiple tasks.
Task libraries are not supported for notebook tasks. Use notebook-scoped libraries instead. See Notebook-scoped Python libraries.
By default, serverless jobs have no query execution timeout. You can set an execution timeout for job queries using the spark.databricks.execution.timeout property. For more details, see Configure Spark properties for serverless notebooks and jobs.
Serverless compute has a maximum runtime of 7 days. Runs that exceed 7 days are terminated by the platform and are not retried. To run workloads longer than 7 days, break them into smaller runs or use classic compute.
Compute-specific limitations​

The following compute-specific features are not supported:

Compute policies
Compute-scoped init scripts
Compute-scoped libraries, including custom data sources and Spark extensions. Use notebook-scoped libraries instead.
Instance pools
Compute event logs
Most Apache Spark compute configurations. For a list of supported configurations, see Configure Spark properties for serverless notebooks and jobs.
Environment variables. Instead, Databricks recommends using widgets to create job and task parameters.
Caching limitations​
Metadata is cached in serverless compute sessions. Because of this, the session context might not fully reset when switching catalogs. To clear the session context, reset the serverless compute resource or start a new session.
Dataframe and SQL cache APIs are not supported on serverless compute. Using any of these APIs or SQL commands results in an exception.
df.cache(), df.persist()
df.unpersist()
df.checkpoint()
spark.catalog.cacheTable()
spark.catalog.uncacheTable()
spark.catalog.clearCache()
CACHE TABLE
UNCACHE TABLE
REFRESH TABLE
CLEAR CACHE
Hive limitations​

Hive SerDe tables are not supported. Additionally, the corresponding LOAD DATA command which loads data into a Hive SerDe table is not supported. Using the command will result in an exception.

Support for data sources is limited to AVRO, BINARYFILE, CSV, DELTA, JSON, KAFKA, ORC, PARQUET, ORC, TEXT, and XML.

Hive variables (for example ${env:var}, ${configName}, ${system:var}, and spark.sql.variable) or config variable references using the ${var} syntax are not supported. Using Hive variables will result in an exception.

Instead, use DECLARE VARIABLE, SET VARIABLE, and SQL session variable references and parameter markers ('?', or ':var') to declare, modify, and reference session state. You can also use the IDENTIFIER clause to parameterize object names in many cases.

Supported data sources​

Serverless compute supports the following data sources for DML operations (write, update, delete):

CSV
JSON
AVRO
DELTA
KAFKA
PARQUET
ORC
TEXT
UNITY_CATALOG
BINARYFILE
XML
SIMPLESCAN
ICEBERG

Serverless compute supports the following data sources for read operations:

CSV
JSON
AVRO
DELTA
KAFKA
PARQUET
ORC
TEXT
UNITY_CATALOG
BINARYFILE
XML
SIMPLESCAN
ICEBERG
MYSQL
POSTGRESQL
SQLSERVER
REDSHIFT
SNOWFLAKE
SQLDW (Azure Synapse)
DATABRICKS
BIGQUERY
ORACLE
SALESFORCE
SALESFORCE_DATA_CLOUD
TERADATA
WORKDAY_RAAS
MONGODB
On this page
Language and API support
Data access and storage
User-defined functions (UDFs)
UI and logging
Networking and workspace access
Streaming limitations
Notebooks limitations
Job limitations
Compute-specific limitations
Caching limitations
Hive limitations
Supported data sources
Was this page helpful?
Yes
No
Send feedback